Ancient Greece was a northeastern Mediterranean civilization, existing from the Greek Dark Ages of the 12th-9th centuries BC to the end of classical antiquity (around 600 AD), that comprised a loose collection of culturally and linguistically related city-states and communities. Prior to the Roman period, most of these regions were officially unified only once under the Kingdom of Macedon from 338 to 323 BC. (This roughly 15-year-long unification, under Philip II of Macedon and his son Alexander the Great, excludes independent Greek city-states in the western Mediterranean, around the Black Sea, Cyprus, and Cyrenaica.) In Western history, the era of classical antiquity was immediately followed by the Early Middle Ages and the Byzantine period.
Three centuries after the decline of Mycenaean Greece during the Bronze Age collapse, Greek urban poleis (city-states) began to form in the 8th century BC, ushering in the Archaic period and the colonization of the Mediterranean Basin. Ancient Greece
The historical period of ancient Greece is unique in world history as the first period attested directly in comprehensive, narrative historiography, while earlier ancient history or protohistory is known from much more fragmentary documents such as annals, king lists, and pragmatic epigraphy. Herodotus is widely known as the “father of history”: his Histories are eponymous of the entire field. Written between the 450s and 420s BC, Herodotus’s work reaches about a century into the past, discussing 6th-century BC historical figures such as Darius I of Persia, Cambyses II and Psamtik III, and alluding to some 8th-century BC persons such as Candaules.
In terms of politics and society: Ancient Greece consisted of several hundred relatively independent city-states (poleis). The geography – many settlements separated by mountainous terrain and seas – encouraged this city-state structure rather than large unified states. Though Greeks saw themselves as a single people in terms of language, religion, and culture, they rarely unified politically, except under Macedon. Some city-states were oligarchies, others had tyrants, and Athens developed democracy. Social classes, slavery, education (especially for boys), warfare, and cultural production (literature, philosophy, science) varied across the poleis.
Cultural legacy: Greek philosophy focused on reason and inquiry; mathematics saw important developments including geometry, formal proof; astronomy; the idea of proofs; early suggestions of heliocentric ideas; poetry, theatre, tragedy, comedy; the art, politics, educational systems of later times; influence through Hellenistic period after Alexander; Roman and Byzantine preservation, revival in Renaissance, etc.